---
slug: the-technical-writer-misnomer
title: The "technical" writer misnomer
authors: abby
date: 2025-01-03
tags: [professional]
---

During the hiring process for a second senior technical writer at my work, I found that my understanding of what a qualified senior writer vastly differed from the recruiter and the hiring manager. This reflected a misunderstanding that I've found throughout the software industry&mdash;including **other** technical writers&mdash;and that is that technical writers must be "technical". And I couldn't disagree more.

Now, let me explain.

<!-- truncate -->

## Non-writers on tech writers

Obviously, there's some level of technical knowledge that's needed the more technical the content is. For example, you can't expect a writer without any knowledge about a programming language to jump right into explaining what's happening in a Java script. But, on the other hand, you don't need someone with developer-level expertise in Java either. Someone with good working knowledge in Python, for example, could probably figure out the gist of what's happening in that script&mdash;similar to the notion amongst developers that, once you know one or two programming languages, you can probably cobble together something functional in a totally new one in a reasonable amount of time. 

Of course, this example is very software-specific, and not all technical documentation needs to have software involved. For instance, the docs I did at [GRIN](https://help.grin.co) never mention code, and instead explain how to use a product interface made for marketing managers. However, this is still squarely within "technical documentation", as it explains complex information (in this case, how to use the product) to an unfamiliar audience (the users) with factual statements and without trying to influence opinions on the product (like marketing or sales communication might). 

The fact is, technical writing has been around long before software was widely accessible. Technical writing as a discipline was formally recognized as a profession since [WWII](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technical_writing#History) in fields that included software, sure, but also encompassed aviation, transportation, consumer goods, and computers themselves&mdash;and while it wasn't literally called "technical writing", the idea of documenting and explaining complicated ideas to laymen has existed long before the computer. 

Despite this, I've found that, particularly within the software industry, there's this idea that the "technical" part of technical writer means that the writer needs to be a **technical person**. Only individuals with developer-level expertise can document code, or only individuals with expert-level industry knowledge can document a product within that domain. And, sure, depending on the complexity of the subject matter, **some** knowledge should be required&mdash;but in no way should a technical writer need to be an **expert.** That's what subject-matter experts (SMEs) are for. The technical writer's job is to take what's in a SME's head and write it out in a way that's understandable for the audience&mdash;and the fact of the matter is, I don't need to know the minutiae about how something is packaged or why a certain function is superior due to its big O (or whatever. Sorry, I took an intro CS class like 10 years ago). Technical writers just need to know **enough** to get the important bits to the readers&mdash;because, let's face it, by the time they're annoyed enough to actually resort to reading docs, readers don't care about that stuff either, and seeing it is more likely to frustrate them. 

This impression doesn't just extend to software development, either. When we were hiring for a technical writer at my company, I found that the recruiter and hiring manager were trying to look for people with experience specifically in the AdTech industry. AdTech is certainly relevant today, and increasingly so, but I wouldn't say it's so massive that it's realistic we'd find someone that had the level of expertise they were looking for who was **also** a technical writer. My manager, who was the hiring manager and does not have a technical writing background, asked if we should tentatively expand the scope to anyone with experience in cybersecurity, and while that was a good start, I knew we'd be denying lots of qualified candidates just because they weren't in the industry already.

So, when I was given a chance to express my opinion, I was firm in that we allow anyone with decent qualifications to be considered, even if they didn't have cybersecurity experience. Technical writers shouldn't be measured on their pre-existing knowledge, because the point of a technical writer is to communicate expert knowledge to **audiences that know less than the experts.** If good technical writing was a question of knowledge, then most industry experts that had some penchant for writing would probably be able to write good docs. But it's not about that&mdash;instead, good technical writing is about **getting into the perspective of the reader.** Why is the user reading this article? What information are they hoping to get? What do they need to know? What are they expecting when they open a doc? 

In my opinion, the mark of a good technical writer shouldn't be measured in their existing knowledge. Instead, **it should be measured in their ability to learn.** Good technical writers are user advocates that aren't afraid to ask the obvious questions&mdash;because those are questions that readers will have&mdash;and know what information is relevant enough to share&mdash;because those are the only things the readers will care about&mdash;are the ones that succeed. And, in fact, I didn't have a cybersecurity background when I applied to my current role either, but that hadn't impeded my ability to do my job.

To emphasize my point, I went through some of the applications my manager shared with me for my opinion. At first glace, I knew why he shared them with me: they had technical backgrounds in software and currently or previously wrote for companies in the cybersecurity space. Further, their writing samples were, from an English standpoint, more or less free of errors and technically made sense. However, when I went through the writing samples they shared, I pointed out some concerns I had from a **user** perspective: the organization of the information was really dense and didn't get to the point fast enough, or the way they ordered some of the steps was unintuitive, or the structure of the sentences made them really difficult to parse, and other decisions that I thought weren't to the level of a senior role.

Thankfully, my manager recognized what I was talking about immediately&mdash;and as a non-technical writer, he shared that he actually did feel confused and uncertain while reading the writing samples, but couldn't put his finger on **why.** My explanation actually touched on all the points that made the writing feel dense and unapproachable for him: it wasn't just because the content itself happened to be for more technical audiences, but because the organization and language used made it frustrating to understand. In other words, while all the content was written correctly and was presumably accurate, it wasn't written in a way the **user** would understand. 

I think this is when the lightbulb went off in my manager's head: just because a technical writer has extensive experience in a field, it doesn't necessarily mean they'll write approachable content. So, he went back to the recruiter and took my advice to look at it from the other way around: find writers with approachable content first, then interview them to see if they have the experience asking questions, learning new concepts, and adapting to some of the technical requirements our specific role required. 

## Tech writers on tech writers

Unfortunately, I've found that this notion that technical writers need to be technical experts isn't limited to just non-tech writers&mdash;especially because tech and tech companies have become "the" places to work at. 

About a year and a half ago, I volunteered to speak on a panel of technical writers at my alma mater. This panel is one of many panels held by a unique colloquium course for undergraduate technical and professional writers. I volunteered for the technical writing panel, but other panels included topics like freelancing, copywriting, professional writing, and other professional avenues for writing. 

I remember that I found these panels very helpful when I was a student, so I was excited to give back and share some of my experience so far in the industry. I was on a panel of four: two of my counterparts worked at FAANG companies, one worked for a very developer-focused company, and I worked at GRIN at the time, which was decidedly **not** developer focused and was a medium-sized startup. The first three also worked on teams, while I was a lone writer. I was also very early on in my career and relatively younger, while the other three were at various stages in the middle-to-late stages (think senior-to-manager level). 

I make this distinction because I think this is actually a very good distribution of experiences&mdash;at least, within the software industry, which is where a lot of technical alumni from Carnegie Mellon tended to end up. However, I found myself feeling like a lone voice on the panel, because after we finished our individual introductions and opened the floor for questions, the inevitable question came up: 

> "Do I need to know how to code to become a technical writer?"

And to my surprise, all three of my colleagues responded with unequivocal "yes"es. They went on to explain that they work with code samples all the time, that you **need** to know how to code in order to write about them, and that they encouraged these undergraduates&mdash;who were all humanities majors&mdash;to take one or two introductory hard science or computer science classes.

I could immediately see some deflated or intimidated expressions on some of these students' faces&mdash;for good reason. Some of these intro science classes could be quite rigorous at CMU, and even if that wasn't the case, I think it's fair to say that students that were in writing disciplines probably just weren't **interested** in taking those classes. But hearing those absolute statements from three technical writers practically slammed the door shut in some of the faces. 

So, when it got to my turn, I tried to be as judicious as possible: I said I respected my colleagues' opinions and, in fact, I agreed with them if you wanted to work in **developer-focused** companies. But&mdash;and I tried to make a **huge** "but" here&mdash;first of all, you don't necessarily need to be a programmer yourself to document code. You just need to know enough to ask questions about it and explain it. Second, there are **a lot** of ways you can be a technical writer outside of documenting software. I was living proof: I was a technical writer at a startup and I didn't document a lick of code. I also mentioned the plethora of other industries for technical writing outside of software: aviation (you don't need to be a pilot to write about the plane), information technology (you don't need to be able to build a computer to explain how the parts work), and even proposal writing and SOPs commonly found in government work were all viable avenues for technical writing as well. 

I concluded by saying that, in my opinion, as long as you're willing to learn and ask questions on behalf of your users, that you should pursue technical writing if that's what you want to do. 

The students continued to ask more specific questions about getting into FAANG companies, which I truly did not mind, but what frustrated me is that my colleagues continued to create an impression that technical writers needed to be experts to even have a chance at getting into a tech company. Maybe that's true for big companies like FAANGs, but I thought it was painting an unrealistic picture of technical writing as a whole. I didn't think it was fair for students to hear such absolutes. Even if my colleagues just prefaced their explanations with "This is how it is at FAANG, but may not be true at other tech companies", I wouldn't have been so frustrated. 

I didn't participate in the panel this year. I think I got too jaded from the last one. But maybe this year, I'll try again. 

But anyways, the point I'm trying to make here is that it seems not even all **technical writers** seem to understand what technical writers do. They've lost the plot a bit, so to speak. I think it's important to be open-minded about what "technical writing" really is. 

My favorite example that still sticks with me is one that my undergraduate advisor gave our class my first technical writing class: an IKEA manual. Minimal words, lots of pictures, but IKEA manuals are step-by-step guides instructing the audience on how to construct furniture. You don't need to be a software engineer to make them, but the level of creativity and ingenuity that went into them to make them universally understood by IKEA consumers everywhere cannot be overstated.